---
title: "#005 - short term vs long term?"
date: 2020-10-30T12:14:12+02:00
draft: false
---

In this article, I'd like to try somethine a little more challenging by choosing a topic I am familiar, yet haven't tried to unravel it yet. I'd like to see the result of the thinking in writing in action.

The gist is to explore the relationship we put between the "short term" and the "long term", especially how much is it worth giving up of the short term for a better long term. It feels that a lot of my procrastination was due to the thinking that "later" was an infinite ressource and that there would always be as much as needed. But for some reason, I feel more and more that everyday is unique and what I choose not to do one day will be time lost. There won't be more time. This is what is giving me the motivation to study and push myself everyday. I used to say that I could read that article in japanese tomorrow, not problem, no time lost. But I now know that if I don't do it, this time not invested in studying will be lost forever.

I don't want to appear too intense or like somebody who work all the time, but I do spend some time thinking about how much "taking it cool" or "resting" is acceptable. I feel that if I spend an evening just watching youtube video about random subject (last one was about japanese woodblock print making), I kind of loose my time, because I didn't create value for the future. On the other hand, I feel that this "wasted" time is not actually really wasted and this is when you rest your mind that you can start thinking at other things better. It's ok to take some time for yourself and make sure you are rested.

Another important concept in the all process is "debt": this is one thing to think that because I didn't spend time studying japanese one day (or to be more accurate, just to read an article or watch a video), I "lost" a day and didn't create future compound interest. Another level is do let a situation that increase your debt. My usual go to example is about washing the dishes. You have the choice of doing it immediatly after dinner, but you are tired and you want to do something fun. If you choose to do it immedialty, it won't take that long to do, but it might be at an moment where you want to spend you time elsewhere. If you decide not to do it and leave the dishes for tomorrow, you have your time on the "short term", but them you have to spend more time to do the dishes. It might also looks like "too much" work and you might delay it more, resulting in a pile of filthy dishes that you never clean and will lead into the evolution of new life form.

Not doing the dishes immedialty created a debt. You didn't create time for free when you decided to not spend the 10 minutes of doing the dishes (check next time you have to do it, it doesn't take long to do in reality), you borrowed time for your own future and you will have to pay it is significant interest. Dishes with dried food takes much longer to do.

The concept of debt is also present at many many places and it should help frame more clearly some choices. I don't want to say that every debt is bad, just that you have to know what you are doing and the prices of things. If you choose to take a shortcut, you need to understand if there will be a price. Maybe if you are a programme, you need to finish something quickly and you don't spend the time to clarify you code, to refactor it a little to make the concept more clearly seprated. The next person who takes it will have to spend more time to figure it out. It might be good choices, especially if you are a startup and the "velocity to money" is critical. You need to sell something quickly, and even more important, you need to learn what you don't know by shipping something and see how people react. It migh not seem an efficient spend of time of the developer, but unfortunatly, there are many cases where this is the only option. But this is a balance, and if you start to take more and more debt, you spend more and more time paying the interests and less working on the premium. You give up your agility and stuff can be ugly.

Always thinking and trying to improve the long term can be an issue too: you can always live in the future and not enjoying the present time. Worst, you can be actively preparing the next stuff and giving up enjoying the moment and your family for something that might never come. Would you ignore your chidlren for a couple of years if you could get rich and not work after? Those years will never be back in the eyes of the children. And even if you make it, will you really spend the time with your children? Will you keep up your promise?

If there are stuff that you need to think about the future and other that you need to focus on the present, what is the rule to separated them? How much work? How much sacrifice in the short term for the long term? If you worked very hard for some years, at the expense of spending time with your children, you might make a lot of money and be "successful", but didn't you create another debt from the point of view of your relationship with your children? Shouldn't that be taken into account when you think about it? But how could you measure that? What would you put in the balance. I know that I am very lucky to spend time with my children as they are still young and that they change so much. My daughter will only be 5 year old once. My son will only be 2 year old once. I don't want to miss that at all.