---
title: "#007 - Consistency beats strategy?"
date: 2020-11-03T12:14:12+02:00
draft: false
---

This is based on my own language learning experience and might not apply everywhere, but I think this is worth having a look. I consider that your are what you do everyday. What defines you the most, is your daily habits and activity: when do you wake up, what are you reading or doing, who are you with. When you want to do anything serious, you have to find the time to do it everyday. Of course, you will start super small, like what I am doing with this writing practice, and when you are in the groove and really do it everyday, you can start building on it and improve. For example, I don't plan to ramble by writing unprepared articles that I don't edit or proofread for a long period of time. This first articles that I write now are just to help me understand that writing is not that hard, that you don't need to fear the blank page if you have prepared in advance your plan and your notes, and that even if you have nothing to say, you can write. I guess that the next steps are going to prepare outline and materials before writing...

Consistency is important because a lot of things takes a long time to achieve. Whatever the domain, if you want to achieve any level, and I don't speak just of mastery, you will have to devote a significant amount of time. The premise is that it is more important to spend a moderate amount of the time everyday on the topic you want to learn, rather than spending large amount of time at random interval. Even more, I consider that being consistant is more important than talent. Sure if you have talent and consistency, you can surely achieve great result, but for most of us, you are figting against giving up. There is the concept of "3 days monk" in japanese, meaning that people start with crazy motivation, but after 3 days most give up.

Consistency key because it forces your to build an habit and this habit will help keep you longer and go through the hard times. It is harder to "break the chain" when you have been doing it after some times. I know this because I have been studying my japanese flashcard for more that 2608 days in a row... don't ask what happend 2609 days ago ;-) (it involved a plan not landing on the proper destination around christmass). Consistency is a engine that, one established, will help you keep at it.

Consistency forces you to do the minimum, so that limit procrastination. You don't have to be ambitious, you have to do the minimum. If you do more, then great, good for you. But it doesn't have to ask a lot. Well, this minimum is usually called "quota" and you have to choose it. For me I try currently to always to my japanese anki review, listen some podcast when I walk and try to read one story from a children book. If I do that, which don't take a lot of time, great day. But usually I can do much more. By forcing me to read a few pages, I trick myself at doing the hard stuff: opening my browser and starting to read. It is incredible how hard it can be to start. I seems that reading the first page is much harder that reading the second page.

Consistency also is more predictable and allow to spend more time in the long term. 10 minutes a day doesn't seem long, but when you look at it from 1 year perspective, it is already 60 hours. If you spend just one hour a day... well this is already 365 hours, almost 10 weeks in a (french) "full time" job.  

Consistency is also better for memory and practice. It create regular opportunity to remember and apply what you have seen. It will strenghten your memory. If you don't do something for a few days, or even worth for a few weeks, then you will have to relearn because you will have forgotten. In the worst case you will stagnate because you forget as much at you learn. This will lead to demotivation. On the other hand, if you work consistently everday, especially if a tool like Anki can be used in your study, you can never go back and forgot a lot. Every day, you will stimulate and use some of what you had learned. In the worst case you will stagnate, but in the average case you will move forward and improve. With this sytem, you can never really fail: you always improve in the long run and you will notice it. Noticing progress is one of the best motivator that I know.

How to bring consistency to your study? First you have to start small. Your first goal is not to produce anything, just to prepare the habit of being consistant. Try to give yourself a super slow quota that is so ridiculously small that you can't not do it. Like studying for 5 minutes. Then choose when you will do it. I suggest the morning as early as possible, so that you will have done your quota and you don't have to think about it. I feel stressed when I have to study my anki cards in the evening because I had a super busy day. I am tired, I make more mistakes. Then pick your first day and setup a regular alarm on your phone. If you don't want to put an alarm, you have to do it after an activity that you are already doing everyday, like just after sitting for eating your breakfast or one your first coffee break. Try to put something that will remind you of what you have to do: mybe a postit on your toothbrush if you want to do it after brushing your teeth.

I am building the habit of writing. I write 1000 words, 5 days a week and I do it just after my children go to bed. This is the first moment where I can sit down and focus a little. After that, I can do whatever I want.